So we have a basic idea of what the browser is doing with longer taking operations,
now let's see something interesting.
Let's add a for loop here,
a normal for loop where we start with i set equal to zero
but now we have a very high number as an exit condition,
let's say 10 million and we increment i by one here every time this runs.
Now let's also add a result here, starts at zero and add i to result here and this is really just a
demo,
so result is set equal to result + i,
we could use the shorthand for this as well of course
and thereafter we console log result and actually, let's add one extra zero here to ramp this up to 100 million
and now save that and reload
and you see, this takes a timer until it prints the result and you learned in the number section that
it will have problems with such big numbers,
keep in mind that i gets bigger and bigger and we add the bigger and bigger i to the already bigger
and bigger number here.
Now the interesting thing is here that after reloading, it took a time to print this. Now let's try to
click this button before this result is there,
what you'll see is that clicked only appears after the result is there as well.
So if I reload, I can hammer this button and nothing happens and all the click events are only processed
once the loop
basically is done.
Now here, we see the single threading in action.
We have this event listener,
we handed this off to the browser and therefore this event listener is not blocking Javascript but this
loop here, this actually is not handed off to the browser and there is no way of handing this off,
this loop executes and Javascript execution is blocked until this operation is done because you can only
execute one operation at a time.
Now that actually proves the point I showed you on the slide earlier already,
also interesting however is that this handed off task also is only able to execute so to say or
to execute this function once the loop is done.
However it makes sense if you think about it,
I mentioned there is only one thing you can execute in Javascript at a given time and whilst the loop
is running that is the loop.
If we click whilst the loop is running, the browser recognizes that click,
sure and it knows it should call this function
so it does that but this function is a Javascript function and in Javascript, we're occupied with this
for loop.
So this function is kind of memorized by Javascript, that it needs to execute that but it only does that
once this operation finished
and that's really important to understand,
that's how Javascript works and how it works with async code and with synchronous code and what it actually
does is it uses a concept called the event loop. You might remember this slide, I showed it earlier in
the behind the scenes module - we had the heap, the stack and I mentioned the event loop there already
but I mentioned that it would become important later, now is later,
now let's have a closer look at that event loop here.
So what is the event loop? In the end, the event loop helps us deal with async code you could say, it helps
us deal with callback functions which typically are used in such async code scenarios.
Let's imagine this set up here,
we have this code and we have our stack.
Now in this code here on the left, you see we're defining two functions,
then here I set a timer,
once this timer is done, we call the show alert function which is the second function we define here
and after the timer, we also call greet here.
Now when this code executes, the stack which is part of the Javascript engine as you learned will do
certain things. Now also be aware that certain other things will be offloaded to the browser, that the
browser kind of gives us a bridge where we can talk to certain browser APIs from inside our Javascript
code to for example offload certain work.
So let's say this code executes now,
now what happens is the two functions are created,
that's the first thing which happens, the greet and the show alert function
and then the first function that is called is actually the built-in setTimeout function.
Now setTimeout does one important thing, it reaches out to the browser because it actually is a browser
API made available in Javascript and sets up the ongoing timer there, in the browser so to say, so the
browser manages this timer
as I mentioned earlier
and then in Javascript, this function is done
and as you learned, it is really done,
it does not block any other code execution. So the timer is still there but that is managed by the browser,
Javascript is done for now.
So the next thing which actually happens is not that show alert executes,
keep in mind that this takes 2 seconds, the timer takes 2 seconds, instead Javascript doesn't wait
for this
as I explained and it instead moves on to the next line, it moves on to the greet method,
so now greet executes, before the timer is completed right away after setTimeout is done and the timer is
offloaded to the browser, then greet executes in the greet function if you have a look at the left here,
we call console log
so that's of course also executed and with that
we're basically done with the code on the left.
Now at some point, the timer is completed though and let's say that actually happens whilst our greet
console log code executes.
Of course this code executes very fast, it does not take it long, it's not such a long if loop as we
wrote it but still, it takes a couple of milliseconds even if it's just a few
and now let's say whilst we're executing console log, the timer finishes.
Now we need some way of telling our Javascript code, the Javascript engine so to say, that the show alert
function which was register this a callback for the timer should be executed
and for this, a message queue is used.
This is provided by the browser and it's also linked to Javascript so to say. Now in this message
queue, the browser registers any code that should execute
once we have time for it, in this case the timer.
So here, the show alert function, this callback so to say is register this a to-do task
once the Javascript engine has time for it,
so now the timer is done and this task is registered. Please note, show alert does not execute at this
point, it's just register this a to-do. The only thing which is really executed in Javascript
at this point is greet and console log because that's what we're currently doing there.
So now with that, let's say in Javascript we're done with that console log executed and therefore greet
also is done and call stack is empty again.
Now we need to get that message or this show alert to-do in our call stack,
we know it's a function in Javascript, it should now be executed
and for this, we use the event loop. The event loop, just like the message queue, is built into the browser
and most Javascript environments, for example also Node.js have that concept of having such an event
loop.
It's just important to understand that it's not part of the Javascript engine,
it's really part of the host environment of Javascript,
so of the thing which uses that Javascript engine. So the event loop is part of the browser and the job
of the event loop in the end is to synchronize the call stack in the engine with our waiting messages.
So in the end, what the event loop does is it runs basically all the time and it always sees, is the stack
empty and do we have pending to-dos, and if the stack is empty, then the event loop executes
so to say and it pushes any waiting messages or any to-do functions therefore into the call stack.
So the event loop waits until the call stack is empty and once that is the case, it moves our message
or the callback function we registered earlier as a function that is now actively executed into our
call stack.
So the message queue is now empty and now this function runs in our Javascript code.
So here show alert runs, this calls the built-in alert function here as you can see on the left,
once this is done, the call stack is empty again. This is what the browser does behind the scenes with the event
loop and with our code and also with these callback functions we hand off to the browser APIs
and that is a pattern that typically is used for async operations.
So if we have a look at this code again, what we do here with add event listener is here, we're handing
something off to the browser, we're handling this click listener off to the browser and we tell it that
this is the function that should be executed once a click occurs,
then we continue in Javascript and we have this long taking task which basically occupies our call
stack,
it's not part of a function here but it therefore is basically running in an anonymous function you
could say, in a big anonymous function that wraps everything if you will.
So this now executes there and the call stack in our Javascript engine
therefore is not empty.
So if we click the button, if we reload whilst we're still doing this for loop, then this click is registered
and the browser pushes this function as a to-do onto our message
queue but the event loop sees that we still have work to do on the call stack and therefore, it waits to
execute this function until the call stack is empty and that only happens once this executed
and once we logged this result to the console which is why we see the clicked output only after we see
the result, even if we click the button whilst this was still going on, simply because of how the browser
handles this.
And this is really important knowledge, you need to know what Javascript does behind the scenes here
to understand why you write code in a certain way and to understand that for example, this code here
executes before this code, even though you register this first because this is an async task and you
wait for this to happen but you don't wait for it by blocking your Javascript execution but instead
that continues and only some things, like this for loop which you typically don't write like this, you
don't have such long running for loops typically, such operations can block your Javascript code, these
expected long taking operations or these operations like event listeners where you don't know if and
how often they will happen,
these are handed off through the browser
so that your Javascript code is never blocked.